---
layout: kit
title: "A Romantic Method for Reading"
kit_type: romantic
---
<div class="top-links">

<a href="{{ '/kits/romantic-quick-kit/' | relative_url }}" class="quickkit-pill">← Back to Quick
Kit Menu</a>

</div>


The Romantics didn't just have new ideas about art; they developed a new
*method* for understanding it. This was a core part of their
self-conscious project to define and champion a new literature against
the prevailing standards of Neoclassicism.<sup>[1](#ref5)</sup> At its
heart is a radical premise from the philosopher Friedrich
Schleiermacher: understanding is not our default state.
**Misunderstanding is the norm.** So interpretation isn't a passive
reception of meaning; it's a methodical art that must be "willed and
sought at every point."

This toolkit gives you that method. It’s a rigorous way analyze a text
by reconstructing the unique creative vision that gave it shape.

## The Core Method: A Four-Step Loop

Schleiermacher’s process is a loop, not a checklist. You move through
these steps iteratively, refining your understanding with each pass.

### 1. Engage the Two Rails of Interpretation

Every act of interpretation requires two parallel lines of inquiry. You
must hold both in tension.

- The **Grammatical Side** (The System): Analyze the text as a product
  of a shared system. Look for the rules it follows: the language, genre
  conventions, historical context, and formal structures. This is the
  common ground, the public dimension of the work.
- The **Psychological Side** (The Singular Practice): Analyze the text
  as the product of a singular mind. Trace its unique habits, recurring
  choices, and specific deviations from the grammatical template. This
  isn't about amateur psychoanalysis; it's about reconstructing the
  *Keimentschluß* or "seminal decision," the originating impulse where
  the author's foundational feeling (*Gefühl*) took on a specific
  direction and became a concrete, generative idea.

### 2. Turn the Hermeneutic Circle

You can only understand the whole of a text through its parts, but you
can only understand the parts in the context of the whole. This is the
famous *hermeneutic circle*. Far from being a trap, it's a "necessary
and productive process."

- **How it works:** Start with a preliminary sense of the whole (a
  hypothesis). Use that to interpret a specific part (a word, a scene).
  Let that detailed analysis of the part refine or even shatter your
  initial hypothesis about the whole. Repeat. Understanding is the
  gradual, spiraling motion of this circle.

### 3. Make a Disciplined “Divinatory” Leap

At some point, analysis isn't enough. You must make an imaginative,
hypothesis-driven leap. Schleiermacher called this the *"divinatory"
method* (from the French *deviner*, to guess). It's an intuitive guess
about the organizing intention or creative act that could have produced
this specific text. This isn't mysticism; it is itself an act of
*Gefühl*, an immediate, feeling-based grasp of another's inner life.
This disciplined hypothesis must then be constantly tested against the
textual evidence gathered from the two rails and the hermeneutic circle.

### 4. Listen for the Surplus Meaning

Finally, listen for what exceeds the author’s apparent intent. The
critic Friedrich Schlegel argued that great works often "aim at more
than \[they\] know," carrying "unconscious meanings." Look for
productive contradictions, unintended ironies, and patterns that reveal
the hidden assumptions of a historical moment. This surplus is where the
most vital interpretation often begins.

## The Ultimate Subject: A Mind's Story of Formation

The Romantics applied this interpretive method not just to the works of
others, but to the most complex text of all: a human life. Their great
subject was the story of an individual's development, a process the
Germans called *Bildungsgeschichte*, or a "story of formation."

This process is the subject of the famous fictional genre, the
*Bildungsroman* ("novel of formation"), but the Romantics applied it
directly to their own lives. The critic M. H. Abrams calls the
quintessential Romantic version of this a "crisis-autobiography." This
is not a story of smooth, gradual growth. It is a secularized spiritual
journey that follows a distinct pattern: a fall from a state of primal
unity with nature, a painful period of alienation and self-conscious
reflection, and a climactic return to a higher, more integrated state of
being.

This is where the interpretive method and the literary subject become
one. In a work like William Wordsworth's epic poem *The Prelude*, the
poet acts as his own hermeneuticist. He looks back at the "text" of his
own past and uses the hermeneutic circle to understand how the "parts"
of his life (specific memories or "spots of time") fit into the "whole"
of his mature poetic identity. The act of writing the poem becomes the
act of achieving the self-understanding it describes.

## The Goal of Interpretation

Schleiermacher’s most audacious claim is that the goal of this method is
to understand an author "better than he understood himself." This is not
a claim to superior intellect, but a statement about the nature of
interpretation. The critic’s task is to make explicit the implicit
patterns, the intuitive stylistic habits and unconscious assumptions,
that the author followed in the act of creation. Interpretation is not
merely a replication of the author's thoughts; it is an act of
illumination that reveals the full, and often surplus, meaning of the
work itself.

### Go Deeper (Open Sources & Scholarship)

- **Theory:** Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy on
  [Hermeneutics](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/hermeneutics/) and
  [Schleiermacher](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/schleiermacher/).
- **Practice in Action (Primary Texts):**
  - William Wordsworth, [“Preface to Lyrical Ballads”
    (1802)](https://anthologydev.lib.virginia.edu/work/Wordsworth/wordsworth-preface)
    — A manifesto for a new kind of poetry.
  - Samuel Taylor Coleridge, [*Biographia
    Literaria*](https://www.gutenberg.org/files/6081/6081-h/6081-h.htm)
    — Dives into the philosophical distinction between mechanic and
    organic form.
- **Scholarship:**
  - <span id="ref5">René Wellek, "The Concept of 'Romanticism' in
    Literary History," *Comparative Literature* (1949).</span>

<div class="bottom-links">

<a href="{{ '/kits/romantic-quick-kit/' | relative_url }}" class="quickkit-pill">← Back to Quick
Kit Menu</a>

</div>
