---
layout: kit
title: "The Author-Function: From Romantic Soul to Algorithmic System"
kit_type: ai
---
<div class="top-links">

<a href="{{ '/ai-hermeneutics/ai-hermeneutics-kit/' | relative_url }}" class="quickkit-pill">← Back to AI
Hermeneutics Kit</a>

</div>


The claim that an AI can be an "author" often provokes strong
resistance. This reaction is typically grounded in a Romantic ideal of
the author as a singular, creative soul. However, the history of
literary theory and hermeneutics shows that this concept was already
being challenged and deconstructed long before the advent of artificial
intelligence. Understanding this history is essential for asking more
precise questions about AI's role in creating texts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div class="section" markdown="1">

## The Romantic Baseline: The Author as Origin

The popular understanding of authorship is largely a holdover from
Romanticism. In this view, the author is the original source of the
text's meaning, a unique consciousness who pours their authentic, lived
experience into the work. As explored in posts on this blog, this is the
worldview that sees the author as a living presence who can "pour his
meaning into you," like Whitman, or as a pastor whose personal struggle
authenticates their sermon.

This model makes the author's intention the ultimate goal of
interpretation. To critique an AI for lacking a "soul" or "sincere
intent" is to judge it against this specific, historically-situated
ideal.

</div>

<div class="section" markdown="1">

## The 20th-Century Critique: De-centering the Author

Twentieth-century thought launched a critique of this author-centric
model, arguing that meaning is produced by larger systems, not just
individual minds.

### Roland Barthes and "The Death of the Author"

In his seminal 1967 essay, Roland Barthes declared the "death of the
author," arguing that a text is not a message from a single source but a
"multi-dimensional space in which a variety of writings, none of them
original, blend and clash." For Barthes, a text is a "tissue of
quotations" drawn from innumerable centers of culture. An AI, trained on
a vast corpus of human text, is a startlingly literal manifestation of
this idea. It is a system designed to weave together a "tissue of
quotations" based on statistical patterns, without a singular,
originating consciousness.

### Michel Foucault and the "Author-Function"

Michel Foucault took a different approach, asking "What is an author?"
He concluded that the "author" is not a person but a social construct—an
"author-function." This function serves to classify, organize, and give
authority to certain discourses. It is a principle of coherence we
impose on texts. From this perspective, the question is not whether an
AI is a person, but whether its output can be governed by an
author-function. We can speak of the "style" of a particular model
(e.g., GPT-4) or the coherence of texts produced from a specific prompt,
treating the system as a functional, if not personal, author.

### Paul Ricoeur and "Distanciation"

As detailed on another page in this kit, Paul Ricoeur argued that the
act of writing itself creates *distanciation*. A text is inevitably
separated from its author's intent, its original audience, and its
historical situation. This "semantic autonomy" means the text's meaning
is found in the "world" it projects, not in the mind of its creator. AI
represents a state of *absolute distanciation*—a text that begins its
life totally autonomous, with no originating psyche to recover. This
forces us to engage with the text on its own terms, which is the task
Ricoeur set for all interpretation.

</div>

<div class="section" markdown="1">

## Conclusion: A More Precise Question

The history of hermeneutics shows that the simple question "Can an AI be
an author?" is poorly framed. It assumes a stable, Romantic definition
of "author" that has long been contested. A more precise inquiry,
informed by 20th-century theory, would ask:

- What kind of *author-function* does a specific AI system perform?
- How does an AI's "tissue of quotations" reveal the cultural logic of
  its training data?
- When we interpret a text produced under conditions of *absolute
  distanciation*, where do we locate its meaning and authority?

Framed this way, AI ceases to be a threat to a traditional idea and
becomes a case study for understanding the complex, systemic nature of
textual production that theorists have been mapping for decades.

</div>

<div class="bottom-links">

<a href="{{ '/ai-hermeneutics/ai-hermeneutics-kit/' | relative_url }}" class="quickkit-pill">← Back to AI
Hermeneutics Kit</a>

</div>
